---
title: "Jo's (not so) definitive guide to moving abroad"
date: "2026-01-01"
preview image: "movin.jpg"
description: "somewhere in between a reflection (for myself) and advice/tips (for others) about moving to a new country."
draft: "true"
---

If you have the means to do it, I would always recommend moving to a new country for a while. When I moved, I could never have predicted all the ways I'd grow up and learn from this experience, and I believe anyone who moves abroad would have parallels. So this post is somewhere in between a reflection (for myself) and advice/tips (for others) about moving to a new country.

Talking to people who moved abroad has been immensely helpful for me, so this is my way of (hopefully) doing the same for others. Enjoy!

---


## How I got here 🇩🇪

I want to say that my decision to move to Munich, Germany was planned and deliberate. Up until graduating, I’d followed a pretty traditional path — in high school, I knew I’d attend university. I was good at science and math, and my dad was an engineer, so naturally that was what I studied. But coming out of school, the paths were much less well-defined. Having kept my options as open as possible up until that point, it was daunting to pick a specific job and career to focus on. Success is also much less well-defined outside of academic settings — classes have clear metrics for your progress and performance, but ‘succeeding’ in your career can look very different for different people. I had no idea ‘where I saw myself in ten years’ (I still do not).

I lived in Toronto my whole life, and aside from two years of university, I always lived in my childhood home. I had always wanted to explore different parts of the world, beyond just visiting — I wanted to live there, get to know people there, and experience (not just touristy) things I wouldn’t have the chance to at home. I tried to do this at various points during my undergrad, but opportunities were seriously limited by COVID, and the ones I did get (first in Calgary, then in Singapore) were both cancelled or shifted to remote for this same reason. By the end of my degree, my world just felt a bit small — I felt restless and wanted to see the world and grow in ways you just won’t if you stay in the place you were born and raised.

So I applied to trail (my current job) on a bit of a whim. I was scrolling through a Slack channel, which I had been added to during a Responsible AI conference I’d attended earlier that year, and saw a posting for a software engineering role. I applied, and feel extremely (extremely) lucky for how things have worked out since. I (albeit a tad naïvely) moved to a new continent in a place where I did not yet speak the language, which of course comes with many ups and downs -- but overall, I am (so far) extremely glad I did it. 

---

Below, I will go into those ups and downs, and (some of) the things I've learned while navigating them. 

[!collapse-start] Some things I really like about Germany 🙂
- **Germans have a reputation for being a bit cold and direct — and while I sometimes notice this, I also appreciate how this makes the nice conversations more genuine**. Coming from Canada, which is notoriously polite and apologetic (sorry) -- so this was an especially jarring shift, but one I have come to appreciate over time. If someone tells you something, you know they mean it and aren’t just saying it from a place of politeness or performative courtesy. If someone offers help, or says they’d love to grab coffee sometime, you can bet they’ll actually reach out to arrange it. Someone once said to me that “Germans can be like coconuts” (in the NICEST way) — people can seem reserved/blunt/direct at first, and this can be hard to swallow or take you aback (the hard shell of the coconut); but once you get to know them, people are friendly and the honesty seems to lead to deeper, more meaningful connections in the long run (the soft inside of the coconut). Eg. I have many german friends who are still close with people they met in kindergarten; and many others who have gone well out of their way to help me navigate various parts of being in a new country.
- **Nice little interactions**. Moving abroad means you'll inevitably spend more time alone and/or feeling like an outsider. This makes once-small interactions/connections with people feel more special. For example: People saying hi and bye as they enter and exit the waiting room at my Dr’s office, whereas in Toronto it's always dead quiet; or the grandma who heard my music through my headphones at the gym, and started smiling at me and dancing to it in the changing room; someone helping me learn a new word or phrase in German; conversations with people in my book club/running groups/etc; the list goes on. 
- **Slowly watching this new place start to feel like home**. I don’t know if Munich fully feels like ‘my home’ yet, but every once in a while I have moments where I am very glad to get to live here. Walking home or running through Olypark while the sun is setting or rising (its so beautiful!), taking a weekend trip to the Alps, seeing all the people in the park or at cafes on a nice sunny day. These are the really, really lovely parts of being here that I hope not to take for granted. Beyond that, sometimes when I go on a trip, I notice myself longing to be back in Munich — for my routines and friends. It can be scary to feel like _neither_ Toronto nor Munich is home, but it is also cool to think they _both_ sort of are. 
[!collapse-end]


[!collapse-start] Moving abroad will teach you a lot 🤓
- **It forces you to become more comfortable in unfamiliar environments**: Even if a country 'seems similar' to your home country, there are almost certainly differences that you will notice/become more apparent as you spend more time there. In my case, this meant getting used to Bavarian traditions and German communication, as well as other less country-specific differences, such as grocery store layouts/selection (you will almost inevitably miss your favourite/go-to foods from home), visa and government processes, knowing which stores sell which items, how to make friends in the new place, etc. Many of the [things] you wouldn't think twice about at home become more daunting just because they are less familiar -- small wins feel like bigger accomplishments. And yet, somehow you will figure out how to navigate it -- this can do wonders for your self efficacy, resilience, and general ability to take on future challenges. 
- **Starting over / building from the ground up**: When you move, you start from a blank slate, for better or for worse. This can be true for everything from your personality to accolades you'd [accrued] prior to moving. You/your friends probably see you as a certain 'type' of person with certain personality traits -- it can be surprising to see which of those stick, and which new ones emerge, when you're in a completely new environment. Similarly, I remember feeling like I'd worked so hard to get this fancy engineering degree from a fancy program in Canada, but it felt like far fewer people recognized it (had heard of it) abroad. On the one hand, [it can feel tiring/frustrating to have to 'prove myself' all over again], on the other hand I found this a good reminder for what I actually care about/am good at right now. Eg. I'm not just a good engineer because I have a fancy degree, I'm a good engineer because I paid attention/worked hard/carried forward the lessons I learned during that fancy degree into everything I do now. It's much better to believe (know) the latter is true than the former. 
- **Getting to know people from all over the world**: Prior to moving, I had a pretty well-established group of friends (and family, of course) in Canada. Because of how long I'd lived there, 'my people' often grew up under very similar circumstances/shared many of the same life experiences and/or interests as me. Moving abroad strips most of this away (again, for better or for worse) -- you _have_ to constantly put yourself out there to make new friends, and this means getting to know all sorts of people with all sorts of interests and from all sorts of countries. My book club (more on that later), for example, has ~12 consistent people, spanning 40 years in age and from 8 different countries. I've learned so much about the world through the people I've met -- and its always a good reminder that your own experiences/culture/environment are only a tiny tiny piece of an much, much, much bigger picture. This, in turn, makes you a more well-rounded, humble, and curious person. 
[!collapse-end]


[!collapse-start] What can be tough 🙁
- **Feeling old friendships fade**. There is the excitement new friendships you are building, but they’re not as deep (just yet). In my first few months in Germany, I felt like I kept having the same superficial conversations over and over and over. Like all of my social interactions had been reduced to: “Hello”, “I’m Joanna”, “I’m from Canada, where are you from?”, “what do you do for work?” etc etc. Then after that meetup / hike / language cafe was done, I would not see that person again 90% of the time. It felt like I was putting myself out there so often, but having so little real connection to other people. I missed my friends and how close we used to be and how comfortable we were around each other. Its hard to watch those dynamics between shift as we each move on with our respective lives, even though we know we are both on paths that are very good for us — daily conversations slowly turn to sporadic catch up calls, which are lovely but miss so much of the crux of what the friendship used to be. Life feels like its happening really fast - it can’t be summarized like a highlight reel in a phone call.
- **Missing family,** and wondering why I would go so far away when you can lose people in an instant and it feels like we should spend as much time together as possible. I care a lot about family - I was always close with my parents and brother growing up, so it feels weird to move away from them and I often question whether I will regret doing so later. Conversely, I know that my visits home are 100x as special as ever before, and that I’ll never ever take my family or friends for granted. For example, I wonder if I would talk to my mum so often if I were still in Toronto, or whether I would ‘put it off till later’ knowing that she’s only a subway ride away.
- **Having grown up differently than those around me** -- when I'm in Toronto, its more likely that the people I'm around/talking to share a similar set of experiences from their upbringing. Even if you didn't grow up together, you have a base level of understanding with each other from having been raised under similar circumstances. Moving abroad, there are far fewer shared experiences to draw from -- even the pandemic is not necessarily common ground since every country handled (and therefore experienced) it quite differently. Because of this, it sometimes feels like I have to give more context, and can be frustrating when someone doesn't understand why I feel a certain way (eg. if that feeling comes from something I experienced before moving, which they would be unfamiliar with). That said, I often find myself highlighting many of my Canadian memories/stories with a lot of pride -- sharing them with people who haven't heard of them before makes me (a) realize how lucky I was to grow up how I did, and (b) feel very patriotic about my country! And beyond that, it forces me to connect with people over different parts of my personality than I would normally turn to in Canada, which inherently helps me develop new/more parts of myself :)
- **The language barrier.** I often feel badly that people need to switch to English to communicate with me. I know it takes extra effort for them to switch to my language, and I also know it limits how much we are able to connect with one another. This sounds small, but its surprising how much this guilt builds up and affects other parts of life (everything just feels a bit harder) -- ranging from relatively small (I have put off doing laundry only because I'm afraid of not understanding the instructions on the machine, I have omitted ingredients from recipes because I was too scared to ask grocery store staff for help -- etc, etc, the list goes on) to more important (my bank didn't have any customer service in English -- I had a problem with my account and ultimately had to summon a trusted friend as a translator). Beyond that, it took some time to adjust to not being able to understand much of what was being said around me — this is sometimes a bit isolating, but it can also be a bit fun to imagine what people might be talking about, or to try to understand bits of what they’re saying. I can never get bored while walking home, since I always have street signs to look at and quiz myself on which ones I understand. 
- **Lastly, being in a new place can just generally feel a bit more alone.** To be clear, this is not always a bad thing. I like to have alone time where I can ponder new things while exploring new places and activities, and it can be nice to have a fresh start. That said, its destabilizing to be away from the people who know well and shared parts of your past. You are who you are partly because of your own internal compass but also because of the people around you — but in a new country, the people around you don’t know the version of you that existed before you came here, or the experiences that led to it. They’re missing big chunks of the puzzle, and sometimes that can mean a nice clean slate, but sometimes it can make you miss the comforts of people around you who _know_ you and get you without you having to explain yourself. The people who you know you can trust and say vulnerable things to. So I miss being around people who shared those big, formative experiences.
[!collapse-end]


[!collapse-start] Things that helped me adjust 🙂‍↕️

**1. BINJO:** 

I started putting a BINJO card on my website, with a (somewhat random/disjointed) set of goals for the year. Every time I made progress towards one of them, I would update the site -- and when I got all five goals in a row/column/diagonal (yes, you guessed it -- BINJO!), I treated myself to a prize :). This activity turned out to be incredibly valuable for a couple of reasons: 

(1) Many of the goals I set out involved pushing myself to do things that were slightly out of my comfort zone -- having them in the BINJO gave me the extra bit of motivation I needed to actually do them. This includes both individual activities (eg. reading X number of books, running X kms, etc), and group ones (eg. hosting X number of events, sending X postcards); 

(2) the items often helped me explore my new country -- I took two day trips per month in 2025, a friend took me clubbing for my first time (its big over here haha), partook in a triathlon organized by a colleague, swim (regularly, now) in the munich olympic pool, tried a dance class, and so on. I imagine I would have done some of them without the BINJO, but I would likely not have gone out of my way to make them happen, and yet I was so so glad to have done each one; 

(3) When you move, many of your routines/regular structures and places you rely on are no longer there. You have to readjust -- find your favourite spots (grocery stores, running routes, cafes, parks, etc) and things to do. The BINJO gave me a semi-structured way to 'throw things at the wall and see what sticks'. 

(4) It's a great conversation starter! I often talk to my friends and colleagues about my progress and upcoming items. Often, people will offer tips and/or words of encouragement for completing them, and sometimes are interested in doing them with me :). I recently published the 2026 edition [here][www.j-roy.com/#/binjo] -- prior to posting it, I was surprised at how many friends were asking me about it/when it would come out/what items would be included (everyone was excited for the launch day!) -- it felt like it had become something (albeit relatively small) that people could come together around. Many have also asked me for the template I used, so I posted it as an npm component [here][https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-binjo]. 

**2. Starting a book club:** 

I'd wanted to join a book club for some time prior to moving, but didn't have time for one because of school and other commitments (I also just didn't know of any happening amongst people I knew). When I moved to Munich, I tried to join some existing book clubs through an app called Meetup, but found they were often already 'full' (ie. had a recurring group of people who consistently went, so the events didn't have open/extra places). 

So I decided to start one myself. I created a group on Meetup called 'Munich Book Club' and, within a week or so, had over 150 users join. This is of course way too many people to have in a book club, so each event was limited to ~10-12 attendees. We met at a cafe downtown, and ended up getting a pretty regular crowd of returning members. 

My favourite part about this book club is how it exposes me to people who I probably never would have spent time with otherwise. We all come from very different backgrounds and have relatively different (including literary) interests. There are people from all over the world -- we initially connected over whichever book we read each month, but have also had many good conversations about topics completely unrelated to books. 

I was nervous about bringing so many people together when I didn't know them and had no way to guarantee that we would get along/enjoy our time together, but it worked out surprisingly well (plus, I loved reading their book suggestions!). Now, we have a relatively active group chat and a monthly meeting that I consistently look forward to and enjoy :).

Of course, it doesn't need to be a book club. Another international friend of mine started a badminton club, or you could start a hiking club/running club/etc etc etc. It doesn't really matter what the group is doing, as long as its something that interests you. As long as you can find a platform to share it, there will likely be more people interested than you expect -- and you will automatically have common ground to discuss with them. 

**3. Connecting with other people who have moved abroad:** 

This tip is probably more common/traditional than the ones above, but it has really helped me so I wanted to highlight it anyways. When you move abroad, you will automatically feel more connected to anyone else who has (or who is currently) moving abroad.

In the months before I left Canada, I told pretty much everyone that I'd be moving to Munich -- this led to many "oh! I have a [cousin/friend/uncle/etc] who lives in Germany. I can introduce you!" And so they did, and I have made a couple of pretty good friends that way. 

It doesn't only need to be people living in your country/city -- having friends living in different countries means you can go visit them (and vice versa)! Many of the ups and downs I discussed above are common/location-agnostic experiences -- talking to others who have navigated them previously can be immensely helpful, both (a) to figure out how to navigate them yourself, and (b) to feel less alone/crazy for finding them challenging. This is, of course, exactly what I'm trying to do with this article :). 

**4. Invite friends and family to come visit:** 

When people come to visit you in your new location, you will see how much progress you've made. Their confusion with transit, directions, language, culture/custom, etc will likely all remind you of yourself when you first arrived. But you will no longer be confused -- instead, you'll be able to explain things and show them around :) It's easy to miss that kind of progress because it happens slowly and you're not always aware of it -- but seeing it in other people is a good reminder of how far you've come. 

Beyond this, even if there are barriers to visiting your home country, being around other people who know it well/lived there too can make you feel much closer to home. It's always nice to have a familiar face/someone who knows the 'old' you.

**5. Choose your job (or school/program) wisely:** 

You spend a lot of time at work, so of course it also influences your experience abroad -- When I moved, I got incredibly lucky with the job I found myself in. I immediately clicked with the team, and consider them to be some of my closest friends in Germany -- it's been a chance to work with smart, nice, driven people who not only let me be my silly self, but who I have learned a ton from in my time here so far. They were extremely welcoming and supportive, both with the 'living in a new country' side of things (getting a visa, learning german, finding a place to live, introducing me to friends/people with similar interests), as well as the professional/software engineering side of things. 

All of this went a really long way to make a new country feel more like 'home'. Of course, I realize that 'clicking' with a team at work often comes down to luck -- it's hard to predict how well you'll fit in anywhere -- but I think it's definitely worth a second thought if an interview for a job abroad felt off/not right somehow. I imagine that having trouble at work would have made life abroad much tougher to navigate. 
[!collapse-end]

---

Being in a new country can be a bit isolating at times, so going out of your way to do things that will help you connect with people is so worthwhile. Even if you don't do a BINJO, you can (and should) try new things -- the best part of being in a new country is that people are unlikely to recognize you if you totally embarass yourself in the process :D 

I have responsibilities now that I did not have before, and I have overcome things that I wasn’t sure I’d be able to on my own. I sometimes think about how proud little Jo would be of me. I used to get so homesick, summer camp away from my parents was so terrifying — but now here I am on a different continent alone, and figuring myself out just fine.